README.md, before:

# tckts

A minimal, plain-text ticket tracker for the command line. No databases, no JSON, no YAML - just human-readable text files.

## Features

- **Plain text storage** - Files are readable and editable by hand
- **Multi-project support** - Organize tickets by project prefix (e.g., BACKEND-1, UI-23)
- **Ticket types** - Categorize as bug, feature, task, chore, or epic
- **Status workflow** - pending → in_progress → done with timestamps
- **Dependencies** - Define which tickets block others
- **Zero dependencies** - Built with Zig stdlib only

## Installation

Requires [Zig 0.15](https://ziglang.org/download/) or later.

```bash
# Build
zig build

# Or build optimized release
zig build -Doptimize=ReleaseFast
```

The binary will be at `zig-out/bin/tckts`.

## Quick Start

```bash
# Initialize a new project
tckts init MYPROJECT

# Add some tickets
tckts add "User authentication" -p MYPROJECT -t feature
tckts add "Fix crash on startup" -p MYPROJECT -t bug
tckts add "Write tests" -p MYPROJECT -t task -d MYPROJECT-1

# List tickets
tckts list MYPROJECT

# Show ticket details
tckts show MYPROJECT-1

# Start working on a ticket
tckts start MYPROJECT-1

# Complete a ticket
tckts done MYPROJECT-2

# Remove a ticket
tckts rm MYPROJECT-3
```

## Commands

### init

Initialize a new project with a prefix.

```bash
tckts init <PREFIX>
```

Creates `.tckts/<PREFIX>.tckts` file.

### add

Create a new ticket.

```bash
tckts add <title> [options]
```

**Options:**
- `-p, --project <PREFIX>` - Project prefix (default: MAIN)
- `-t, --type <TYPE>` - Ticket type: bug, feature, task, chore, epic
- `-d, --depends <IDs>` - Comma-separated dependency IDs
- `-m, --message <DESC>` - Ticket description
- `--priority <low|medium|high>` - Set priority

**Examples:**

```bash
# Simple ticket
tckts add "Add pagination" -p API -t feature -m "Support page and limit params"

# Bug with high priority
tckts add "Memory leak" -p API -t bug --priority high

# Task that depends on another ticket
tckts add "Update docs" -p API -t task -d API-1

# Epic with multiple dependencies
tckts add "New module" -p API -t epic -d "API-1, API-2"
```

### list

List tickets in a project.

```bash
tckts list [PREFIX] [--all | --pending | --blocked]
```

By default shows only pending tickets. Use `--all` to show all tickets.

### show

Display full details of a ticket.

```bash
tckts show <TICKET-ID>
```

### start

Mark a ticket as in-progress.

```bash
tckts start <TICKET-ID>
```

Records the `started_at` timestamp.

### done

Mark a ticket as completed.

```bash
tckts done <TICKET-ID>
```

Records the `completed_at` timestamp. If the ticket has incomplete dependencies, you'll see which tickets are blocking it.

### rm

Remove a ticket from a project.

```bash
tckts rm <TICKET-ID>
```

Removing a ticket also removes it from other tickets' dependency lists.

### projects

List all projects.

```bash
tckts projects
```

### help

Show usage information.

```bash
tckts help
```

## File Format

Tickets are stored in `.tckts/<PREFIX>.tckts` files using a simple block format:

```
# tckts | prefix: MYPROJECT | version: 1

---
id: MYPROJECT-1
type: feature
status: in_progress
title: User authentication
created_at: 2024-12-23T10:30:45Z
started_at: 2024-12-23T14:00:00Z
priority: high

Implement OAuth2 login flow with support for
Google and GitHub providers.
---

---
id: MYPROJECT-2
type: bug
status: done
title: Fix crash on startup
created_at: 2024-12-23T10:30:45Z
completed_at: 2024-12-23T16:00:00Z
depends: MYPROJECT-1
---
```

### Fields

| Field | Required | Description |
|-------|----------|-------------|
| id | Yes | Ticket ID (PREFIX-NUMBER) |
| type | Yes | bug, feature, task, chore, or epic |
| status | Yes | pending, in_progress, or done |
| title | Yes | Short summary (max 280 chars) |
| created_at | Yes | UTC timestamp (ISO 8601) |
| started_at | No | When moved to in_progress |
| completed_at | No | When marked as done |
| depends | No | Comma-separated list of ticket IDs |
| priority | No | low, medium, or high |
| description | No | Free-form text after blank line |

### Limits

| Limit | Value |
|-------|-------|
| Title length | 280 characters |
| Description length | 64 KB |
| Tickets per project | 10,000 |
| Dependencies per ticket | 100 |
| Prefix length | 32 characters |

## Dependencies

Tickets can depend on other tickets. When you try to complete a ticket with incomplete dependencies, you'll see which tickets are blocking it:

```bash
$ tckts done API-3
Cannot complete API-3: blocked by incomplete dependencies:
  - API-1
  - API-2
```

Complete the dependencies first, then mark the ticket as done.

## Development

```bash
# Run tests
zig build test

# Build and run
zig build run -- help

# Build with arguments
zig build run -- add "Test" -t feature
```

## License

MIT

Commit message:

feat: TCKTS-13 require explicit project prefix, TCKTS-12 add epic guidance
- Remove default MAIN project from add/list commands
- Show available projects in error messages when prefix missing
- Add epic workflow documentation to quickstart guide
- Update help text to reflect required -p flag

README.md, after:

# tckts

A minimal, plain-text ticket tracker for the command line. No databases, no JSON, no YAML - just human-readable text files.

## Features

- **Plain text storage** - Files are readable and editable by hand
- **Multi-project support** - Organize tickets by project prefix (e.g., BACKEND-1, UI-23)
- **Ticket types** - Categorize as bug, feature, task, chore, or epic
- **Status workflow** - pending → in_progress → done with timestamps
- **Dependencies** - Define which tickets block others
- **Zero dependencies** - Built with Zig stdlib only

## Installation

Requires [Zig 0.15](https://ziglang.org/download/) or later.

```bash
# Build
zig build

# Or build optimized release
zig build -Doptimize=ReleaseFast
```

The binary will be at `zig-out/bin/tckts`.

## Quick Start

```bash
# Initialize a new project
tckts init MYPROJECT

# Add some tickets (note: -p is required)
tckts add "User authentication" -p MYPROJECT -t feature
tckts add "Fix crash on startup" -p MYPROJECT -t bug
tckts add "Write tests" -p MYPROJECT -t task -d MYPROJECT-1

# List tickets
tckts list MYPROJECT

# Show ticket details
tckts show MYPROJECT-1

# Start working on a ticket
tckts start MYPROJECT-1

# Complete a ticket
tckts done MYPROJECT-2

# Remove a ticket
tckts rm MYPROJECT-3
```

## Commands

### init

Initialize a new project with a prefix.

```bash
tckts init <PREFIX>
```

Creates `.tckts/<PREFIX>.tckts` file.

### add

Create a new ticket.

```bash
tckts add <title> -p <PREFIX> [options]
```

**Options:**
- `-p, --project <PREFIX>` - Project prefix (required)
- `-t, --type <TYPE>` - Ticket type: bug, feature, task, chore, epic
- `-d, --depends <IDs>` - Comma-separated dependency IDs
- `-m, --message <DESC>` - Ticket description
- `--priority <low|medium|high>` - Set priority

**Examples:**

```bash
# Simple ticket
tckts add "Add pagination" -p API -t feature -m "Support page and limit params"

# Bug with high priority
tckts add "Memory leak" -p API -t bug --priority high

# Task that depends on another ticket
tckts add "Update docs" -p API -t task -d API-1

# Epic with multiple dependencies
tckts add "New module" -p API -t epic -d "API-1, API-2"
```

### list

List tickets in a project.

```bash
tckts list [PREFIX] [--all | --pending | --blocked]
```

By default shows only pending tickets. Use `--all` to show all tickets.

### show

Display full details of a ticket.

```bash
tckts show <TICKET-ID>
```

### start

Mark a ticket as in-progress.

```bash
tckts start <TICKET-ID>
```

Records the `started_at` timestamp.

### done

Mark a ticket as completed.

```bash
tckts done <TICKET-ID>
```

Records the `completed_at` timestamp. If the ticket has incomplete dependencies, you'll see which tickets are blocking it.

### rm

Remove a ticket from a project.

```bash
tckts rm <TICKET-ID>
```

Removing a ticket also removes it from other tickets' dependency lists.

### projects

List all projects.

```bash
tckts projects
```

### quickstart

Show LLM onboarding guide with workflow instructions.

```bash
tckts quickstart
```

Outputs a comprehensive guide for LLMs on how to use tckts, including workflow best practices and command examples. Useful for onboarding AI assistants to your project.

### help

Show usage information.

```bash
tckts help
```

## File Format

Tickets are stored in `.tckts/<PREFIX>.tckts` files using a simple block format:

```
# tckts | prefix: MYPROJECT | version: 1

---
id: MYPROJECT-1
type: feature
status: in_progress
title: User authentication
created_at: 2024-12-23T10:30:45Z
started_at: 2024-12-23T14:00:00Z
priority: high

Implement OAuth2 login flow with support for
Google and GitHub providers.
---

---
id: MYPROJECT-2
type: bug
status: done
title: Fix crash on startup
created_at: 2024-12-23T10:30:45Z
completed_at: 2024-12-23T16:00:00Z
depends: MYPROJECT-1
---
```

### Fields

| Field | Required | Description |
|-------|----------|-------------|
| id | Yes | Ticket ID (PREFIX-NUMBER) |
| type | Yes | bug, feature, task, chore, or epic |
| status | Yes | pending, in_progress, or done |
| title | Yes | Short summary (max 280 chars) |
| created_at | Yes | UTC timestamp (ISO 8601) |
| started_at | No | When moved to in_progress |
| completed_at | No | When marked as done |
| depends | No | Comma-separated list of ticket IDs |
| priority | No | low, medium, or high |
| description | No | Free-form text after blank line |

### Limits

| Limit | Value |
|-------|-------|
| Title length | 280 characters |
| Description length | 64 KB |
| Tickets per project | 10,000 |
| Dependencies per ticket | 100 |
| Prefix length | 32 characters |

## Dependencies

Tickets can depend on other tickets. When you try to complete a ticket with incomplete dependencies, you'll see which tickets are blocking it:

```bash
$ tckts done API-3
Cannot complete API-3: blocked by incomplete dependencies:
  - API-1
  - API-2
```

Complete the dependencies first, then mark the ticket as done.

## Development

```bash
# Run tests
zig build test

# Build and run
zig build run -- help

# Build with arguments
zig build run -- add "Test" -p MYPROJECT -t feature
```

## License

MIT
